---
layout: post
title: Fatigue whyyy
category: tech
subject: article
description: "Fatigue is a phenomenon commonly encountered in modern JavaScript development. Why?"
tags:
- diversity
- systems
image:
  alt: "duck"
  caption: ""
  url: "images/nonicons/duck.png"
  width: 256
  height: 256
published: false
---

{{ page.description }}

To answer this question, I believe we need to utilize systems thinking.
Because the industry of software development is a human system, is it not?

In most programming ecosystems, architects design the tools that people will
use to be coupled and connected, to ease the journey of working. Usually, an
integrated development environment (IDE) emerges as the holy grail for
their developers to manage the newness and complexity, with the goal of becoming
and staying productive in that ecosystem.

Often, religious wars ensue about which technology choice to adopt, because

* programmer productivity tools are important for speed and accuracy,
* teams like the synergy of having tool monoculture to reduces friction,
* the inefficiency of diversity is oft viewed with derision.

When we're creating economic value, people tend to value
low drag and max performance over variety or individuality:
this is as true across industries, from software to farming.
So if you're not in the One True Way for any ecosystem,
you're in danger of derision.

Yikes! We all want to be accepted.
So, we discover what is the agreed upon monoculture, ditch our diversity,
and conform to "accepted best practices."
Who wants to be subjected to scorn?
So we streamline our ways, lose our uniqueness, and
quack like the other ducks in our pond.

There is some value in this. We've all known individuals with 1,001 wing-dings
who refuse to fly with the flock, even maybe even been that "wild duck"
in some contexts. Streamlining creates efficiency. But at what cost?

A cause of diversity in software developers which should be acknowledged
is difference in knowledge and skill levels.
More than other industries, software
development (and the front-end in particular) requires _continual_ learning
to survive.
We're coming to acknowledge that life long learning is essential
to what we do. Education is an integral to our business. And so there is less
shame in being competant with the latest XYZ thingy because
come on, it hasn't even existed for two years yet.

When we refuse to acknowledge maturity in knowledge with tech, and place
ourselves (and everybody) on the same plateau, it gets overwhelming fast.

The front-end of software lives proximate to the world of design. Designers,
unlike developers, have high appreciation of variety, diversity,
personality, individuality, flare, and difference.
